Kubernetes/README.md, before:

# Kubernetes

## Pod Creation Example
Pods are the smallest deployable units in Kubernetes. Here are some example commands to create and manage pods:

```bash
kubectl run -h | less # Display help information for the 'kubectl run' command "/dry-run" option

kubectl run myapp --image=myimage --dry-run=client -o yaml > myapp-deployment.yaml

kubectl apply -f myapp-deployment.yaml # Apply the generated YAML file to create the deployment. There is also create option.

kubectl get pods # Verify that the pod is created

kubectl describe pod myapp | less # Get detailed information about the created pod. Use the JKL keys to navigate up and down.

kubectl exec -it nginx-emmanuel -- /bin/bash # Access the pod's shell interactively

apt install iputils-ping # Install ping utility inside the pod

ping google.com # Test network connectivity from within the pod

exit # Exit the pod's shell

kubectl logs myapp # View the logs of the created pod

kubectl delete pod myapp # Clean up by deleting the created pod
```

## Deployment Example
Deployments in Kubernetes are used to manage a set of identical pods. Here are some example commands to create and manage deployments:

```bash
Examples:
  # Create a deployment named my-dep that runs the busybox image
  kubectl create deployment my-dep --image=busybox

  # Create a deployment with a command
  kubectl create deployment my-dep --image=busybox -- date

  # Create a deployment named my-dep that runs the nginx image with 3 replicas
  kubectl create deployment my-dep --image=nginx --replicas=3

  # Create a deployment named my-dep that runs the busybox image and expose port 5701
  kubectl create deployment my-dep --image=busybox --port=5701

  # Create a deployment named my-dep that runs multiple containers
  kubectl create deployment my-dep --image=busybox:latest --image=ubuntu:latest --image=nginx

  watch -n 1 "kubectl get pods" # Watch the pods status
```

## Namespace Management
In Kubernetes, namespaces are used to organize and manage resources within a cluster. Here are some common commands for managing namespaces:

```bash
kubectl create namespace my-namespace # Create a new namespace

kubectl create namespace stevens --dry-run=client -o yaml > stevens-ns.yaml  # Generate YAML for namespace creation

kubectl get namespaces # List all namespaces

kubectl get ns # Short form to list all namespaces

kubectl describe namespace my-namespace | less # Get detailed information about a specific namespace

kubectl get pods --namespace=my-namespace # List all pods in a specific namespace
kubectl get pods -n my-namespace # Short form to list all pods in a specific namespace

kubectl run myapp --image=myimage --namespace=my-namespace # Create a pod in a specific namespace

kubectl config set-context --current --namespace=my-namespace # Set the default namespace for the current context
kubectl config view | less # View the current kubeconfig settings

kubectl port-forward pods/mealie-5df8c97467-xl67x 9000 -n stevens # Port forward to a pod in a specific namespace
```

## Networking in Kubernetes
Kubernetes networking allows communication between pods and services. Here are some example commands related to networking:

```bash
kubectl get pods --all-namespaces -o wide # List all pods across all namespaces with detailed information including IP addresses

```

## Service Management
Services in Kubernetes are used to expose applications running on a set of pods. Here are some example commands to create and manage services:
```bash
kubectl expose pod myapp --type=NodePort --port=8080 # Expose a pod as a service
kubectl expose deployment my-dep --type=LoadBalancer --port=80 --target-port=8080 # Expose a deployment as a service

# Delete a service
kubectl delete service my-service
``` 

## Fixing Common Issues
Here are some commands to troubleshoot and fix common issues in Kubernetes with pods and deployments:

```bash
kubectl get events --sort-by='.metadata.creationTimestamp' | less # View recent events in the cluster to identify issues    
kubectl describe pod myapp | less # Get detailed information about a specific pod to diagnose issues

docker kill $(docker ps -q -f name=k8s_mealie) # Forcefully stop a misbehaving container (use with caution)

kubectl scale deployment mealie --replicas=0 -n stevens # Scale down a deployment to zero replicas to stop all pods
kubectl delete pod myapp --force --grace-period=0 # Forcefully delete a pod that is stuck in terminating state
```

**Minikube Specific:** The LoadBalancer Tunnel
In a "real" cloud (AWS/Azure), a LoadBalancer Service automatically gets an external IP. In Minikube (especially on WSL), the LoadBalancer IP will stay <pending> unless you create a tunnel.

How to fix it: After applying your manifests, open a separate terminal window and run:

```Bash
minikube tunnel
```

## Storage Management
Kubernetes provides various storage options for managing persistent data. Here are some example commands related to storage:

### Ephemeral Storage Example
**Ephemeral storage** is temporary storage that is tied to the lifecycle of a pod(i.e the volume is deleted when the pod is deleted). Here are some example commands and a YAML configuration for using ephemeral storage in a pod.

Types of ephemeral storage:
- emptyDir
- configMap

```bash
kubectl get pvc # List all Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs) in the current namespace

# Explain this yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: test-pd
spec: # Define the pod specification
  containers:
  - image: registry.k8s.io/test-webserver
    name: test-container
    volumeMounts: # Mount the volume at /cache inside the container
    - mountPath: /cache
      name: cache-volume # Reference to the volume defined below
  volumes: # Define the volume to be used by the pod
  - name: cache-volume
    emptyDir: # Use an emptyDir volume type
      sizeLimit: 500Mi # Set size limit for the emptyDir volume
      medium: Memory
```

### Persistent Storage Example
**Persistent storage** is storage that persists beyond the lifecycle of a pod.

#### Persistent Volume (PV) and Persistent Volume Claim (PVC)
**Persistent Volumes (PVs)** are storage resources in a Kubernetes cluster, while **Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs)** are requests for those resources by users. Here are some example commands and YAML configurations for using PVs and PVCs in Kubernetes.


#### Persistent Volume Claim (PVC) Example

```yaml
# persistent-volume-claim.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim  # <--- Changed from PersistentVolume
metadata:
  name: mealie-data-pvc      # typically ends in -pvc
  namespace: stevens         # <--- VALID now!
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce          # "I need a drive that locks to one node"
  resources:                 # <--- VALID now! (PVs use 'capacity')
    requests:
      storage: 500Mi         # "I need at least 500Mi of space"
  storageClassName: ""       # <--- Critical for binding to your specific PV

```
1. The Namespace is Now Valid
Unlike a PersistentVolume (which is global), a PersistentVolumeClaim is Namespaced.

Correct: namespace: stevens is now required (or assumes 'default').

Why: A PVC is a request ticket belonging to a specific team or app (Mealie in the stevens namespace).

2. The spec becomes a "Request"
In a PVC, the spec defines what you need, not what physically exists.

3. The "Matchmaking" (Binding)
When you apply this PVC, Kubernetes acts like a broker. It looks at your spec and searches the cluster for a PersistentVolume (PV) that matches:

Access Mode: Does the PV support ReadWriteOnce?

Size: Is the PV's capacity >= the PVC's request (500Mi)?

StorageClass: Do the class names match?

Critical Note for your Lab (Rancher Desktop)
If you apply this PVC without creating a manual PV first, one of two things will happen:

Scenario A: Dynamic Provisioning (The "Magic" way) Rancher Desktop comes with a default StorageClass (usually local-path). If you omit storageClassName: "" or set it to local-path, Rancher will automatically create a PV for you on the fly. You don't need to write a PV manifest at all!

Scenario B: Manual Binding If you want it to bind to the specific manual PV we discussed in the previous turn, you must ensure both the PV and PVC share the exact same storageClassName (e.g., set both to manual or leave both empty "").

```yaml
# persistent-volume.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolume
metadata:
  name: mealie-data-pv
  # namespace: stevens  <-- REMOVED (PVs are global)
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  capacity:             # 'resources' is for PVCs, 'capacity' is for PVs
    storage: 500Mi
  hostPath:             # <-- ADDED: The actual location on disk
    path: "/mnt/data/mealie"
```

**The spec Breakdown:**
1. accessModes: - ReadWriteOnce
This defines how the storage can be mounted by the nodes in your cluster.

ReadWriteOnce (RWO): The volume can be mounted as read-write by a single Node.

Analogy: Like a USB drive. You can only plug it into one computer at a time.

Note: Multiple pods on that same node can read/write to it, but pods on other nodes cannot touch it.

Other options (for context):

ReadWriteMany (RWX): Multiple nodes can read/write simultaneously (requires a file system like NFS).

ReadOnlyMany (ROX): Multiple nodes can read, but none can write.

2. resources
This section defines the capacity (size) of the storage.

requests: You are asking the cluster to reserve a specific amount of space.

storage: 500Mi: You are requesting 500 Mebibytes.

Note: 500Mi (Mebibytes) is slightly larger than 500MB (Megabytes). In Kubernetes, we usually use Mi/Gi.

3. hostPath
This specifies that the storage is located on the host node's filesystem.

```bash
kubectl apply -f persistent-volume.yaml # Create the Persistent Volume (PV)
kubectl apply -f persistent-volume-claim.yaml # Create the Persistent Volume Claim (PVC)

kubectl get pv # List all Persistent Volumes (PVs) in the cluster
kubectl get pvc -n stevens # List all Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs) in the 'stevens' namespace

kubectl describe pv mealie-data-pv # Get detailed information about a specific PV
kubectl describe pvc mealie-data-pvc -n stevens # Get detailed information about a specific PVC

kubectl delete pvc mealie-data-pvc -n stevens # Delete the PVC when no longer needed
kubectl delete pv mealie-data-pv # Delete the PV when no longer needed
```

#### Storage Classes
StorageClasses in Kubernetes define different types of storage (like SSDs, HDDs, network storage, etc.) that can be dynamically provisioned for Persistent Volumes (PVs). Here are some example commands related to StorageClasses:

```bash
kubectl get storageclass # List all StorageClasses in the cluster
kubectl describe storageclass standard # Get detailed information about a specific StorageClass
``` 

#### Access Modes
Access Modes in Kubernetes define how a Persistent Volume (PV) can be mounted by pods. Here are the common access modes:  
- ReadWriteOnce (RWO): The volume can be mounted as read-write by a single node. Multiple pods on that node can read/write to the volume, but pods on other nodes cannot access it.  
- ReadWriteMany (RWX): The volume can be mounted as read-write by multiple nodes simultaneously. This requires a file system that supports concurrent access, like NFS.  
- ReadOnlyMany (ROX): The volume can be mounted as read-only by multiple nodes. No node can write to the volume.
- ReadWriteOncePod (RWOP): The volume can be mounted as read-write by a single pod. This is a more restrictive mode introduced in newer Kubernetes versions.
Here are some example commands related to Access Modes:

```bash
kubectl get pv # List all Persistent Volumes (PVs) in the cluster
kubectl describe pv my-pv # Get detailed information about a specific PV, including its access modes
``` 

```bash
kubectl get all -n stevens # List all resources in the 'stevens' namespace to verify storage usage
```


### Port Forwarding and Secure Tunneling Explained
Port forwarding in Kubernetes allows you to access a specific port on a pod from your local machine. This is useful for debugging or accessing applications running inside the cluster without exposing them externally. Secure tunneling, on the other hand, involves creating a secure connection (often using SSH or VPN) to access resources within a private network, such as a Kubernetes cluster. Here are some example commands for port forwarding and secure tunneling:
```bash
kubectl port-forward pod/myapp 8080:80 # Forward local port 8080 in the machine to port 80 on the pod named 'myapp'
ssh -L 8080:myapp-service:80 user@bastion-host # Create a secure tunnel to access 'myapp-service' through a bastion host
```

**Note:** kubectl port-forward pod/my-pod 8080:9090 means that requests to localhost:8080 on your machine will be forwarded to port 9090 on the pod named my-pod.

while ssh -L 8080:myapp-service:80 user@bastion-host means that requests to localhost:8080 on your machine will be forwarded to port 80 on the service named myapp-service through the bastion host.
**bastion-host** is a server that acts as a gateway to access resources in a private network securely.
How to use bastion-host:
1. Ensure you have SSH access to the bastion host.
2. Use the ssh -L command to create a secure tunnel from your local machine to the bastion host, specifying the local port, remote service, and port.
3. Access the service by connecting to localhost on the specified local port.

### Examples of Different Contexts for Port Forwarding

1. **Port Forwarding from a Remote Machine (e.g., Homelab)** 



```bash
kubectl port-forward pod/my-pod 8080:9090
```
1. **endy@sochi => A powershell/ssh terminal to my homelab "sochi"**
Even though you typed it in PowerShell, the command is executed on sochi (because you’re inside an SSH session).

Result:

Port 8080 opens on sochi, not on your Windows laptop.

The forward is reachable as:

On sochi: curl http://127.0.0.1:8080

From your Windows machine: NOT directly (unless you do an additional tunnel)

To use it from Windows browser, you typically do SSH local forwarding from Windows to sochi, for example:

Run the port-forward on sochi (inside SSH), then in a separate Windows terminal:

ssh -L 8080:127.0.0.1:8080 endy@<sochi_ip>

Then open on Windows: http://localhost:8080

(That makes Windows localhost:8080 hop into sochi localhost:8080, which then hops into the Pod.)


 2. **(base) endie@Endiesworld => a WSL terminal from my windows machine**
 Here the command runs inside WSL.

Result:

Port 8080 opens inside the WSL environment.

Often (WSL2), Windows can still reach it via http://localhost:8080 because WSL forwards localhost, but behavior can vary by setup.

How to sanity-check where it’s listening:

In WSL:

ss -ltnp | grep 8080

curl http://127.0.0.1:8080
 
 
3. **endy@sochi => bash terminal on my homelab**
This is the same effective outcome as (a), because the command runs on sochi.

Result:

Port 8080 opens on sochi.

Reachable locally on sochi via localhost:8080.

Not reachable from your Windows machine unless you add routing/tunneling.

Commit message:

Update: included commands and arguments in a pod

Kubernetes/README.md, after:

# Kubernetes

## Pod Creation Example
Pods are the smallest deployable units in Kubernetes. Here are some example commands to create and manage pods:

```bash
kubectl run -h | less # Display help information for the 'kubectl run' command "/dry-run" option

kubectl run myapp --image=myimage --dry-run=client -o yaml > myapp-deployment.yaml

kubectl apply -f myapp-deployment.yaml # Apply the generated YAML file to create the deployment. There is also create option.

kubectl get pods # Verify that the pod is created

kubectl describe pod myapp | less # Get detailed information about the created pod. Use the JKL keys to navigate up and down.

kubectl exec -it nginx-emmanuel -- /bin/bash # Access the pod's shell interactively

apt install iputils-ping # Install ping utility inside the pod

ping google.com # Test network connectivity from within the pod

exit # Exit the pod's shell

kubectl logs myapp # View the logs of the created pod

kubectl delete pod myapp # Clean up by deleting the created pod
```

## Commands and Arguments in a Pod
In Kubernetes, you can define the command and arguments to run in a container within a pod using the `command` and `args` fields in the pod specification. Here are some examples:
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: myapp
spec:
  containers:
  - name: mycontainer
    image: myimage
    command: ["sleep"] # Specifies the command to run, i.e overrides the default ENTRYPOINT of the image
    args: ["300"]           # Specifies the arguments to the command i.e overrides the default CMD of the image
```


## Deployment Example
Deployments in Kubernetes are used to manage a set of identical pods. Here are some example commands to create and manage deployments:

```bash
Examples:
  # Create a deployment named my-dep that runs the busybox image
  kubectl create deployment my-dep --image=busybox

  # Create a deployment with a command
  kubectl create deployment my-dep --image=busybox -- date

  # Create a deployment named my-dep that runs the nginx image with 3 replicas
  kubectl create deployment my-dep --image=nginx --replicas=3

  # Create a deployment named my-dep that runs the busybox image and expose port 5701
  kubectl create deployment my-dep --image=busybox --port=5701

  # Create a deployment named my-dep that runs multiple containers
  kubectl create deployment my-dep --image=busybox:latest --image=ubuntu:latest --image=nginx

  watch -n 1 "kubectl get pods" # Watch the pods status
```

## Namespace Management
In Kubernetes, namespaces are used to organize and manage resources within a cluster. Here are some common commands for managing namespaces:

```bash
kubectl create namespace my-namespace # Create a new namespace

kubectl create namespace stevens --dry-run=client -o yaml > stevens-ns.yaml  # Generate YAML for namespace creation

kubectl get namespaces # List all namespaces

kubectl get ns # Short form to list all namespaces

kubectl describe namespace my-namespace | less # Get detailed information about a specific namespace

kubectl get pods --namespace=my-namespace # List all pods in a specific namespace
kubectl get pods -n my-namespace # Short form to list all pods in a specific namespace

kubectl run myapp --image=myimage --namespace=my-namespace # Create a pod in a specific namespace

kubectl config set-context --current --namespace=my-namespace # Set the default namespace for the current context
kubectl config view | less # View the current kubeconfig settings

kubectl port-forward pods/mealie-5df8c97467-xl67x 9000 -n stevens # Port forward to a pod in a specific namespace
```

## Networking in Kubernetes
Kubernetes networking allows communication between pods and services. Here are some example commands related to networking:

```bash
kubectl get pods --all-namespaces -o wide # List all pods across all namespaces with detailed information including IP addresses

```

## Service Management
Services in Kubernetes are used to expose applications running on a set of pods. Here are some example commands to create and manage services:
```bash
kubectl expose pod myapp --type=NodePort --port=8080 # Expose a pod as a service
kubectl expose deployment my-dep --type=LoadBalancer --port=80 --target-port=8080 # Expose a deployment as a service

# Delete a service
kubectl delete service my-service
``` 

## Fixing Common Issues
Here are some commands to troubleshoot and fix common issues in Kubernetes with pods and deployments:

```bash
kubectl get events --sort-by='.metadata.creationTimestamp' | less # View recent events in the cluster to identify issues    
kubectl describe pod myapp | less # Get detailed information about a specific pod to diagnose issues

docker kill $(docker ps -q -f name=k8s_mealie) # Forcefully stop a misbehaving container (use with caution)

kubectl scale deployment mealie --replicas=0 -n stevens # Scale down a deployment to zero replicas to stop all pods
kubectl delete pod myapp --force --grace-period=0 # Forcefully delete a pod that is stuck in terminating state
```

**Minikube Specific:** The LoadBalancer Tunnel
In a "real" cloud (AWS/Azure), a LoadBalancer Service automatically gets an external IP. In Minikube (especially on WSL), the LoadBalancer IP will stay <pending> unless you create a tunnel.

How to fix it: After applying your manifests, open a separate terminal window and run:

```Bash
minikube tunnel
```

## Storage Management
Kubernetes provides various storage options for managing persistent data. Here are some example commands related to storage:

### Ephemeral Storage Example
**Ephemeral storage** is temporary storage that is tied to the lifecycle of a pod(i.e the volume is deleted when the pod is deleted). Here are some example commands and a YAML configuration for using ephemeral storage in a pod.

Types of ephemeral storage:
- emptyDir
- configMap

```bash
kubectl get pvc # List all Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs) in the current namespace

# Explain this yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: test-pd
spec: # Define the pod specification
  containers:
  - image: registry.k8s.io/test-webserver
    name: test-container
    volumeMounts: # Mount the volume at /cache inside the container
    - mountPath: /cache
      name: cache-volume # Reference to the volume defined below
  volumes: # Define the volume to be used by the pod
  - name: cache-volume
    emptyDir: # Use an emptyDir volume type
      sizeLimit: 500Mi # Set size limit for the emptyDir volume
      medium: Memory
```

### Persistent Storage Example
**Persistent storage** is storage that persists beyond the lifecycle of a pod.

#### Persistent Volume (PV) and Persistent Volume Claim (PVC)
**Persistent Volumes (PVs)** are storage resources in a Kubernetes cluster, while **Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs)** are requests for those resources by users. Here are some example commands and YAML configurations for using PVs and PVCs in Kubernetes.


#### Persistent Volume Claim (PVC) Example

```yaml
# persistent-volume-claim.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim  # <--- Changed from PersistentVolume
metadata:
  name: mealie-data-pvc      # typically ends in -pvc
  namespace: stevens         # <--- VALID now!
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce          # "I need a drive that locks to one node"
  resources:                 # <--- VALID now! (PVs use 'capacity')
    requests:
      storage: 500Mi         # "I need at least 500Mi of space"
  storageClassName: ""       # <--- Critical for binding to your specific PV

```
1. The Namespace is Now Valid
Unlike a PersistentVolume (which is global), a PersistentVolumeClaim is Namespaced.

Correct: namespace: stevens is now required (or assumes 'default').

Why: A PVC is a request ticket belonging to a specific team or app (Mealie in the stevens namespace).

2. The spec becomes a "Request"
In a PVC, the spec defines what you need, not what physically exists.

3. The "Matchmaking" (Binding)
When you apply this PVC, Kubernetes acts like a broker. It looks at your spec and searches the cluster for a PersistentVolume (PV) that matches:

Access Mode: Does the PV support ReadWriteOnce?

Size: Is the PV's capacity >= the PVC's request (500Mi)?

StorageClass: Do the class names match?

Critical Note for your Lab (Rancher Desktop)
If you apply this PVC without creating a manual PV first, one of two things will happen:

Scenario A: Dynamic Provisioning (The "Magic" way) Rancher Desktop comes with a default StorageClass (usually local-path). If you omit storageClassName: "" or set it to local-path, Rancher will automatically create a PV for you on the fly. You don't need to write a PV manifest at all!

Scenario B: Manual Binding If you want it to bind to the specific manual PV we discussed in the previous turn, you must ensure both the PV and PVC share the exact same storageClassName (e.g., set both to manual or leave both empty "").

```yaml
# persistent-volume.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolume
metadata:
  name: mealie-data-pv
  # namespace: stevens  <-- REMOVED (PVs are global)
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  capacity:             # 'resources' is for PVCs, 'capacity' is for PVs
    storage: 500Mi
  hostPath:             # <-- ADDED: The actual location on disk
    path: "/mnt/data/mealie"
```

**The spec Breakdown:**
1. accessModes: - ReadWriteOnce
This defines how the storage can be mounted by the nodes in your cluster.

ReadWriteOnce (RWO): The volume can be mounted as read-write by a single Node.

Analogy: Like a USB drive. You can only plug it into one computer at a time.

Note: Multiple pods on that same node can read/write to it, but pods on other nodes cannot touch it.

Other options (for context):

ReadWriteMany (RWX): Multiple nodes can read/write simultaneously (requires a file system like NFS).

ReadOnlyMany (ROX): Multiple nodes can read, but none can write.

2. resources
This section defines the capacity (size) of the storage.

requests: You are asking the cluster to reserve a specific amount of space.

storage: 500Mi: You are requesting 500 Mebibytes.

Note: 500Mi (Mebibytes) is slightly larger than 500MB (Megabytes). In Kubernetes, we usually use Mi/Gi.

3. hostPath
This specifies that the storage is located on the host node's filesystem.

```bash
kubectl apply -f persistent-volume.yaml # Create the Persistent Volume (PV)
kubectl apply -f persistent-volume-claim.yaml # Create the Persistent Volume Claim (PVC)

kubectl get pv # List all Persistent Volumes (PVs) in the cluster
kubectl get pvc -n stevens # List all Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs) in the 'stevens' namespace

kubectl describe pv mealie-data-pv # Get detailed information about a specific PV
kubectl describe pvc mealie-data-pvc -n stevens # Get detailed information about a specific PVC

kubectl delete pvc mealie-data-pvc -n stevens # Delete the PVC when no longer needed
kubectl delete pv mealie-data-pv # Delete the PV when no longer needed
```

#### Storage Classes
StorageClasses in Kubernetes define different types of storage (like SSDs, HDDs, network storage, etc.) that can be dynamically provisioned for Persistent Volumes (PVs). Here are some example commands related to StorageClasses:

```bash
kubectl get storageclass # List all StorageClasses in the cluster
kubectl describe storageclass standard # Get detailed information about a specific StorageClass
``` 

#### Access Modes
Access Modes in Kubernetes define how a Persistent Volume (PV) can be mounted by pods. Here are the common access modes:  
- ReadWriteOnce (RWO): The volume can be mounted as read-write by a single node. Multiple pods on that node can read/write to the volume, but pods on other nodes cannot access it.  
- ReadWriteMany (RWX): The volume can be mounted as read-write by multiple nodes simultaneously. This requires a file system that supports concurrent access, like NFS.  
- ReadOnlyMany (ROX): The volume can be mounted as read-only by multiple nodes. No node can write to the volume.
- ReadWriteOncePod (RWOP): The volume can be mounted as read-write by a single pod. This is a more restrictive mode introduced in newer Kubernetes versions.
Here are some example commands related to Access Modes:

```bash
kubectl get pv # List all Persistent Volumes (PVs) in the cluster
kubectl describe pv my-pv # Get detailed information about a specific PV, including its access modes
``` 

```bash
kubectl get all -n stevens # List all resources in the 'stevens' namespace to verify storage usage
```


### Port Forwarding and Secure Tunneling Explained
Port forwarding in Kubernetes allows you to access a specific port on a pod from your local machine. This is useful for debugging or accessing applications running inside the cluster without exposing them externally. Secure tunneling, on the other hand, involves creating a secure connection (often using SSH or VPN) to access resources within a private network, such as a Kubernetes cluster. Here are some example commands for port forwarding and secure tunneling:
```bash
kubectl port-forward pod/myapp 8080:80 # Forward local port 8080 in the machine to port 80 on the pod named 'myapp'
ssh -L 8080:myapp-service:80 user@bastion-host # Create a secure tunnel to access 'myapp-service' through a bastion host
```

**Note:** kubectl port-forward pod/my-pod 8080:9090 means that requests to localhost:8080 on your machine will be forwarded to port 9090 on the pod named my-pod.

while ssh -L 8080:myapp-service:80 user@bastion-host means that requests to localhost:8080 on your machine will be forwarded to port 80 on the service named myapp-service through the bastion host.
**bastion-host** is a server that acts as a gateway to access resources in a private network securely.
How to use bastion-host:
1. Ensure you have SSH access to the bastion host.
2. Use the ssh -L command to create a secure tunnel from your local machine to the bastion host, specifying the local port, remote service, and port.
3. Access the service by connecting to localhost on the specified local port.

### Examples of Different Contexts for Port Forwarding

1. **Port Forwarding from a Remote Machine (e.g., Homelab)** 



```bash
kubectl port-forward pod/my-pod 8080:9090
```
1. **endy@sochi => A powershell/ssh terminal to my homelab "sochi"**
Even though you typed it in PowerShell, the command is executed on sochi (because you’re inside an SSH session).

Result:

Port 8080 opens on sochi, not on your Windows laptop.

The forward is reachable as:

On sochi: curl http://127.0.0.1:8080

From your Windows machine: NOT directly (unless you do an additional tunnel)

To use it from Windows browser, you typically do SSH local forwarding from Windows to sochi, for example:

Run the port-forward on sochi (inside SSH), then in a separate Windows terminal:

ssh -L 8080:127.0.0.1:8080 endy@<sochi_ip>

Then open on Windows: http://localhost:8080

(That makes Windows localhost:8080 hop into sochi localhost:8080, which then hops into the Pod.)


 2. **(base) endie@Endiesworld => a WSL terminal from my windows machine**
 Here the command runs inside WSL.

Result:

Port 8080 opens inside the WSL environment.

Often (WSL2), Windows can still reach it via http://localhost:8080 because WSL forwards localhost, but behavior can vary by setup.

How to sanity-check where it’s listening:

In WSL:

ss -ltnp | grep 8080

curl http://127.0.0.1:8080
 
 
3. **endy@sochi => bash terminal on my homelab**
This is the same effective outcome as (a), because the command runs on sochi.

Result:

Port 8080 opens on sochi.

Reachable locally on sochi via localhost:8080.

Not reachable from your Windows machine unless you add routing/tunneling.
